Preface A few days before Christmas of 1872, a hundred-odd miles to the north and east of what is now Phoenix, Arizona, advance scouts of a force of American soldiers, the vanguard of the military campaign that launched the Apache Wars, captured a young Indian boy about eight or ten years old. The boy had been looking for a missing horse with his uncle, who, it seems, abandoned him at the enemy's approach. Alone, freezing, the boy waited to be killed, for that was the way of the bluecoats. Instead, the scouts, whom army rolls listed as “Tonto Apaches”—tonto coming from the Spanish word for “fool” or “idiot” and apparently an insult used by other Indians in reference to collaborators—terrified their young captive into revealing the whereabouts of his family, who were hiding in the safety of the Salt River Canyon. Within a few days, the time it took the American soldiers to pick their way through the rugged mountains to reach the remote ranchería, Hoomothya, “Wet Nose,” was an orphan. The people the Americans found there were Kwevkepayas, members of one of the four far-flung tribal branches that would eventually be subsumed under the name “Yavapai.” About a hundred of these Kwevkepayas were sheltering under a rock overhang in a canyon above the Salt River when some hundred and twenty soldiers, accompanied by more than a hundred Akimel O'odham (Pima) and Maricopa auxiliaries and a small detachment of Tonto Apache scouts, attacked. The soldiers rained fire from across the canyon, ricocheting bullets from the roof to cut down the sheltered defenders. An American commander, Capt. James Burns, ordered that boulders be rolled down from above the cave to crush other Kwevkepayas. When the shooting stopped, the Akimel O'odham advanced, crushing the skulls of the dying with rifle butts and rocks. Some seventy-six Kwevkepayas died. Hoomothya's father, two younger siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins, and grandfather were among the dead of what became known as the Battle of the Caves, which an eyewitness, an officer named John Gregory Bourke, called “the most signal blow ever received by the Apaches in Arizona.” History now knows the event as the Skeleton Cave Massacre, a more accurate term, since the so-called battle was decidedly one-sided: one Akimel O'odham fighter died, but otherwise the attacking force did not suffer a single casualty. The Kwevkepayas had ranged across much of the central Arizona highlands for generations, ever since their ancestors moved eastward from the Colorado River country in search of game and a place where fewer enemies lived. Their luck ran out with the arrival of the Americans, who, beginning in the 1860s, effectively declared war on the indigenous peoples of the region, most of whom they collectively called “Apaches,” although only the easternmost of the peoples of the high country were true Apaches, Athapaskans who had migrated into Arizona from far north hundreds of years earlier. The Kwevkepayas and their cousins, the Tolkepayas, were variously known as Apache Mohaves (or Mojaves), Mohave (or Mojave) Apaches, and Yuma Apaches; the Tontos were Yavapais who lived in the Mogollon Rim country near the Verde River and present-day Payson. After 1865, when a mining boom drew hundreds of whites to the region near Prescott and Jerome, no ethnographic niceties were ventured. All Indians became Apaches, and all Apaches became targets. James Burns took Hoomothya, whom he called Mickey or Mike, into his household as something between ward and servant, and there Mike Burns remained for several months, until the captain took ill and left for Washington, leaving it to his family to follow him. The boy's duties were several: he mucked the stables, cleaned the house, shined boots, did odd jobs—and, it appears, was dispatched to spy on Yavapais interned near Fort Whipple, witnessing their destruction as one band after another surrendered before the promise of reservations near their highlands homeland. The promise was not honored. No American officer ever expected that it would be, and the Yavapais were soon relocated to the much-hated San Carlos Reservation along the Gila River in southeastern Arizona. Mike was by this time the charge of a man who would become something of a foster father to him, Capt. Hall S. Bishop, and for the next few years he and Bishop would cross the western frontier, fighting many Indian nations and accumulating adventures that, as Mike relates them in this autobiography, sometimes verge on the improbable—and sometimes even unbelievable. Mike Burns lived in two worlds, and he was at home in neither. The whites alongside whom he served as an army scout and later in various roles never saw him as anything other than an Indian, which was no good thing in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Uprooted and without kin, Mike had only tenuous contact with his own people for many years. Only in his twenties, when he married, did he hear his own language regularly spoken; only then did he receive an education in Kwevkepaya and Tolkepaya lifeways from his in-laws and neighbors. Until his death in 1934 he continued to gather material about his people's beliefs and history, making notes such as this: “To know all the names of the ranges of mountains and peaks: the noted Superstition Mountains are called by the Indians Wee-git-a-sour-ha, ‘a rock looking up.’ Wee-ga-jaide-haw is the mountain called Four Peaks. We call the Salt River Ah-haw-gith-e-la.” Mike tried at several points to publish his historical and ethnographic pieces, turning to help where he could, as he did with one correspondent, a well-meaning schoolteacher: “This is all I can say just now, but if you need more, or if you can get someone who would be interested in what I write, I wish you would tell me so. I need help all the time, as you know; I am an Indian, and I have a large family, and I am the only one now living to look after my children. Please let me hear from you soon. Good-bye, Miss Ruth Arnold. I am a lonely Indian.” Alas, Miss Arnold could do nothing, it appears, to fulfill Mike's dream of presenting the lives of his people from—that anthropological desideratum above all others—the native point of view. Neither, as we will see, could anyone else of his own time. At least, no one did. The memoir that you hold in your hands likewise inhabits the space between two worlds. Written originally in a language that is not quite English, interspersed with grammatical constructions that are not quite Yavapai, Burns's autobiography, most of which takes place in the fourteen tumultuous years from 1872 to 1886, follows a path as circuitous as the history Burns relates.

Unlike so many Native American memoirs and autobiographies before our own time, Mike Burns's story is not an “as told to” account, not filtered for audiences that expected to find their preconceptions about history and Native life reinforced. Armed with a typewriter, Burns set forth a story that is rightly full of indignation and complaint at the treatment that his people had suffered—but more that he, as a person unmoored from his culture and thrust into another, had been made to endure. Even today, more than eighty years after Burns finished writing his story, his condemnations are scorching and discomfiting, and if Burns often seems self-pitying, there is no doubt that he more than earned the right to criticize the dominant Anglo-American society even as he worked, as a scout, to make the Arizona frontier safe for its ascension. I have tried to put Mike's experiences into the ordinary English of his time, careful to use only words that he himself used. I have restructured some of the lesser episodes and tried to give chronological coherence to the whole, but I have also retained many of Burns's pauses, false starts, and sometimes circular storytelling in the spirit of Morris Opler's approach to the Mescalero Apache author of the book Opler called Apache Odyssey: “The narrator was allowed to emphasize, embellish, and ignore as he chose, for it was felt that the degree to which he developed a subject was an index of his emotional investment in it.” By that token, it soon becomes clear what Mike Burns wished to remember: the murder of his people and their continued mistreatment at white hands, something that white audiences of the time had very little interest in hearing. Opler also observed, rightly, that “the Mescalero, as is the case with many other American Indian groups, are well aware that the Western history that the white man has written has much to say about Indian ‘atrocities’ but has passed very lightly over the cruelties suffered by the Indians at the hands of their white antagonists.” Just so, Thomas Edwin Farish, the distinguished historian of early Arizona, published portions of Mike's reminiscences—though considerably toned down, it should be said, by a contemporary editor who, for whatever reason, was inclined to accept official explanations concerning murder, atrocity, robbery, and other crimes against humanity. For all that, Farish was impressed:   So much has been written of the Indians by the white man, so many reports have been made by the military and other authorities, of the massacres by the red men, and so little is known of the Indian's side of the story, that the following stories of the Apache Indians, written by one of themselves, Mike Burns, will, without doubt, cast a new light on the question, not only for Indian account of many battles with the white man, but also for description of the methods of travel and customs and manner of living of the Indians. It is a pathetic narrative, elegant in its simplicity, and shows the deep feeling of an Indian brooding over the wrongs which he has received at the hands of the whites. It is an eloquent appeal for justice at the hands of those who took from him his lands and robbed him of friends and relatives…. I think many parts of it will rank with the orations of Red Fox, Black Hawk and other Indians who have made their names a part of the history of this country.   Generations after his death, Mike Burns finally has a chance to make that appeal for justice, a chance to tell his story. Like Herodotus, he was not always on hand to witness the events he describes. He did not share in all the suffering of his people, but he asked the right and necessary questions and delivered compelling answers. He may not always have been on hand when and where he said he was—but then again, we have no good reason to disbelieve anything he says, at least not on the largest scale. Mike Burns documents, on a personal scale, a record of broken promises that, on the larger scale, so sharply characterizes the history of Indian-white relations across time. In doing so, he provides a view of Arizona history, of Native American history, that we would otherwise not have, and he complicates our view of life on the nineteenth-century frontier, joining the voices of Sarah Winnemucca, Geronimo, Ishi, and other chroniclers of the Native past. He is a necessary witness whose account helps us come to terms with an almost incomprehensible history, and he has an extraordinary tale to tell. —Gregory McNamee

I cannot say exactly when or where I was born, because I belonged to an Apache Indian family whose parents were not educated, so that I could not find any records of my birthplace. Only educated people keep records of their children so that they can know where they were born, and besides, there are no older Indians left alive now. All of my people were killed by the soldiers and by Indian scouts who worked for the government. This was in 1872, in a cave on the north side of the Salt River, where about 225 souls—men, women, and poor innocent children—were living. The place is on the north side of the mouth of Fish Creek on the Salt River, where Horseshoe Dam is now. I left that camp a few days before the slaughter, traveling north with an old man, my uncle, and a horse that carried me on its back. We were overtaken by soldiers in the middle of the night, and I was left alone when my uncle ran away. I got in a rock hole and stayed there all night without any clothes or blankets. The Four Peaks were white with snow, and I was only a few miles away from them. How I got through that freezing night is a miracle. In the morning about sunup I came out of the hole. I had been listening through the night to see if there were any enemies close by, but I could not hear a thing, so I crawled out from a different entrance from the one I entered and went up to a little hill overlooking the countryside. My uncle and I had built a camp the previous night, with a fire to lie beside, but now there were many men in blue clothing there. They made a rush for me. I didn't move, and they came and caught hold of my little arm. They pulled me over rocks and bushes. The men didn't care whether I got hurt or not. The rest of the soldiers were looking for more Indians over the hill, but when they found none they joined us. I was taken to an officer, Captain James Burns of the Fifth US Cavalry. This all happened on December 22, 1872, a date recorded by Lieutenant E. D. Thomas, who was under Captain Burns's command. They were from Fort McDowell, the place where I am living now. It is a mysterious thing, the fact that I am alive to tell how I was saved, while every last one of my tribe was killed. I can only guess that I was born in 1864, because Lieutenant Thomas told me that on the day I was captured he reckoned me to be seven or eight years old. That would make me sixty-six years old now, though I know that I am older than that because I know many things from way back. I can remember when my mother was killed by soldiers a few miles east of Mormon Flat. She ran for her life and crawled into a rock hole, too, and she was pulled out and shot many times. I then had two children to take care of, a little brother and a baby sister. I remember that as if it had happened just a short time ago. It was an awful day for me after I lost my poor mother and had to look after two children. My aunt had a baby, and so that way my little sister was nursed. From that time on my father had a bitter hatred for soldiers and all white people. My father and others would go down into the Salt River Valley looking for soldiers or white men to kill. Once they brought seven or eight ponies into our camp, and they gave one to another man whose camp was beyond the Four Peaks to the north. I was away from our camp at the time. Then soldiers came, and they captured thirty-two women and children and brought them to Fort McDowell, somewhere in the last part of December 1872. The prisoners were taken in wagons across the desert to Florence and then to old Fort Grant on the San Pedro River. A few weeks later the command moved nearer the Superstition and Pinal Mountains, coming across the country to where Globe is now—this was before the town was built—and then on to the San Carlos River, before the San Carlos Agency was established. Then they went on to Fort Thomas and to a newly established post that was also called Fort Grant. Early in the spring of 1873, the soldiers marched back to San Carlos. Captain Burns commanded G Troop of the Fifth Cavalry, and Captain Price commanded F Troop. The two commands moved north from Globe along the Salt River to where Roosevelt Dam now is, then followed Tonto Creek and on to where Payson is now located, crossed the East Verde River, traveled several days, and reached Camp Verde. The soldiers moved on to Fort Whipple, and then G Troop went west to Camp Date Creek.

At that post were many Indians from the west, including Yumas who had come to make a treaty with the soldiers. The Indians remained there for a few weeks, then were moved on to Camp Verde and Cottonwood, about twenty-five miles away. Nearly all of the Yavapais and Tonto Apaches came to Camp Verde to make a treaty with General George Crook, who was commanding the Department of Arizona. General Crook had been friendly, and he told them that they could make their homes in the Verde Valley for as long as they lived. But only a year later General Crook gathered all the Indians and told them that they had to move to the San Carlos Agency. About 3,500 people moved.

In the spring of 1874 Captain Burns and G Company went to Fort Whipple. In 1875 the regiment changed departments, so that the Sixth Cavalry was to come to Arizona and the Fifth was to take its place in the Indian Territory. G Company moved in the early part of July, reaching Camp Verde on the day before the Fourth of July, when many soldiers got drunk. They reached their new station in October. I was with them for eight years, although Captain Burns himself died at Navajo Spring in 1874. Captain Burns's and Captain Price's companies reached them at the rim of the cave. This was a different camp from the one where I had left my grandpa and little brother and sister, who was now about three years old, and my aunt with her five children. It brings tears to my eyes to remember them, for they were all slaughtered there with 225 others, men, women, and children, and along with them the great chief Delshe, who was killed when he told the Indians to get behind the big rocks that stood at the front of the cave, so that the soldiers could not see them. One soldier had me by the arm, just tumbling me over the bushes and the rocks. He didn't care whether I was hurt or killed; he took me along just like he was dragging a log. Most of the soldiers, about six hundred of them, were on a three-hundred-foot-tall cliff at the east corner of the cave. They could not see the Indians. Delshe had said that no enemy would dare attack there because it was such a fortified place. The Indians thought that they were strongly protected, but then the soldiers shot down volleys, bucketsful of lead behind the big boulders against the walls of the cave, pouring down such showers of lead that those whom the bullets hit could not be recognized as humans. The war songs ceased. Only one man was left, and he had just one shot remaining, and with it he killed a Pima Indian scout, right at noon. He might have killed more, but when he reached out with his gun to drag over bullets or a bag of gunpowder, the soldiers fired, and their shots bent his gun nearly in two. He was helpless, and then he was finally shot. He was my brother-in-law, a man who never missed a shot, and he died like a man. The Pima and Maricopa scouts rushed in and killed any Indians who were still alive. They pounded their heads in right in front of the soldiers. Some Apache scouts who were with the soldiers found some women and children alive, and they handed them over to the officers for fear that the Pimas and Maricopas would get them too, so enraged were they, even though just one of their number got killed that day. They weren't satisfied with killing more than two hundred men, women, and innocent children. They gathered about thirty of the wounded and killed them too. Some Apache scouts had fired warning shots before the soldiers arrived. If Delshe's band had rushed out of the cave when they heard them, they would not have been slaughtered. A few feeble old men and women might have been killed, but Chief Delshe urged everyone not to make a break for it. Most of the Indians were depending on the old chief because he had been a great warrior and had fought all kinds of people, and he had always come out victorious when he fought against soldiers and Pimas. This time he was pinned down and surrounded, and he could not protect his people.

After the last of the Yavapais were killed, I was led into the cave. I saw dead men and women lying around in all shapes, horrid to look on. I saw where my grandpa lay; I saw at a distance a body that was in a little rock hole, headfirst, and that was the old man. I was at the west entrance of the cave and sat there crying to death. Then I thought of my little brother and sister, the two I cared for and fed as a mother would. No more hope, no more kinfolk in the world. What would I do? Should I give myself up to the Pimas and Maricopas to be killed there with my family? Should I forget those awful deeds against my people and take on a new and manly courage, resolve to be a different man and hope for a better future? The Pimas and Maricopas had gathered around their dead friend and were crying harder than I was. I thought it best to stop crying while these big men were crying, lest some of them come and beat me with their clubs. The Pimas and Maricopas carried the body away. None of the soldiers or officers or Apache scouts were hurt. Afterward I heard that one soldier got shot in his hat, close to his head, but that was the only near-injury among the hundreds of soldiers. In all history no civilized race has murdered another as the American soldiers did my people in the year 1872. They slaughtered men, women, and children without mercy, as if they were not human. I am the only one living to tell what happened to my people.

2 The slaughter of my people ended at about four in the afternoon. The soldiers took the captives up to the top of the cave and marched the Indians in front of them, and the Apache scouts were warned to keep close watch so that the Pimas and Maricopas did not slip in and kill the women and children before we knew it. There was one woman who was so badly wounded that she could not get on a horse, and so she was left there. Some soldiers gave her food and water, but as soon as they were out of sight some Pimas went back and mashed her head to jelly. They hated the Apaches. It happened that six young women had gotten away from the cave before daybreak that morning. They were saved, unhurt. One of them was a young grown woman, a cousin of mine. When I went to the San Carlos Agency in 1885, I found her there. She was married and had six children. Her husband was a medicine man. She died shortly after I saw her, and all her children died afterward, and her husband died after I came back to McDowell. She was the only one of our three large families to get away. I want to say something about the man who was married to my cousin. Her name was Cealiah (Worthless), and his was Jutahamaka (Swift Hawk). One time he was sick for a long time and no one could do him any good or cure him, so he was left to sleep one morning and finally given up for dead. The next morning everyone moved on to another camp, including his parents, and some men tore down the wigwam where he was lying and threw the sticks and thatch down on him as if he were dead. They piled on wood and the man's things and were about to light it when, to their surprise, they saw the man trying to crawl out of the pile. He asked them why they had put him there. All the men cried and told him that they had been sent to bury him, because he had died the day before. They said that he could not be alive, and someone called out his name, and he replied, “I am alive.” From that day on he told wonderful stories about what he saw in his death dreams. He said that while he was in that state he saw a cloud, and many women dressed in white and lots of children, and someone came up to him and told him to get up and walk away from that place, go home, and throw away all his clothes and put on new ones. Then he must heal people when they were nearly dead. He was advised how to sing over the sick and what songs would work best, and where he needed to put his hands or get someone to pierce the flesh so that he, the medicine man, could suck the bad blood out of the body, the bad blood that was killing the sick person. That man Jutahamaka was dead from one morning to the next, and he was sick for a long time afterward. He was nothing but skin and bones. Well, sir, I have often witnessed when he would be called to see a sick person and would sing over them until some spirit came to point out the part of the body that was most in pain and poisoned, and then someone would take a sharp piece of glass and punch a hole there, and this man would suck out something like a worm or scorpion. He would take the thing from his mouth, mixed with blood, and hold it to the firelight and say that there were many more things like this in the body, and if he could get them all out the sick person would be well in a few days. It came true, sure enough; the man or woman would soon be up and acting like he or she was never sick. Sometimes, though, the sick person would die no matter how he sang. Even though he tried with all his power to bring spiritual aid, sometimes he failed, and at that point he would say that he did not have the power to help the sick and that he thought it best to find another medicine man or woman to do the job. After they climbed out of the cave and got up onto the plateau, the soldiers and officers ordered the Apache scouts to go ahead with the Apache women and children captives, and not to let the Pimas or Maricopas near them. The Apache scouts were told to shoot if anyone disobeyed orders. The whole command marched over the divide toward Four Peaks, and at the foothills they made a camp. The pack train and the horses were left there, while the soldiers walked ahead. During the night three of the wounded captives died.

The next morning the command made an early start for Fort McDowell, and they arrived there toward evening. The remaining captives were put under guard in the horse corral. There was a young lad among the captives whom Lieutenant E. D. Thomas took a liking to and chose to reward. This boy was my cousin, too. He had suffered a flesh wound, but it wasn't dangerous. His mother, a married sister, and, I think, two other children belonging to his family were all taken alive, but his father was killed. No grown men were taken alive at all. This boy was given a room to share with me and two soldiers, a cook and, I think, one who used to take care of the officers' horses. The boy's name was Gaiamama, or Going By. We used to go down to the camp where the captives were held, and Gaiamama would go right over to his mother and sister and stay with them all day long. I would go home by myself or with some soldiers. The captives were held at Fort McDowell for two weeks. One fine morning I missed Gaiamama and went down to the camp, but to my great surprise it was vacant. I came home so lonely, wondering what had happened to the people I talked to every day, what had become of them. Had the soldiers given them up to the demands of the Pimas and Maricopas, so that the innocent women and children would be butchered up the way they had killed all the rest of their people in that cave? There was no way I could find out what had happened to my aunt and her children, because I was not able then to speak English or Spanish and so was at a loss to learn a thing about the captives and my cousin Gaiamama. The soldiers kept me at McDowell for about three weeks. Then they moved away from McDowell one morning with some Apache scouts, following the Verde River, and then they crossed the Salt River just above the present site of the Salt River Dam and camped. To my surprise, an Indian woman came in. The Apache scouts had come across a party of hostile Indians, and most all of them had gotten away, but they did overtake a woman who had a baby strapped to her back. The woman told me that she was my cousin, and she said that the party had been on their way to join the rest of our people at the cave. If they had arrived a little bit sooner, they would have all been killed, but the Salt River happened to be high and they had to wait to cross it. They had been camping along the banks, gathering greens and seeds to eat, for in wintertime plants grow there that the Apaches used to collect. This woman cousin of mine told me that they knew that enemies had killed almost everyone in the cave, and the party, which had come down out of the upper Superstition Mountains, had stayed in a camp at a box canyon alongside the river. They sent a young man over to the cave, and he came back and told them of the great horrors he had seen, with a large cave that was full of dead men, women, and children. The party gave up on the notion of going across the river and moved south, trying to avoid soldiers and Pimas. Most of the older men thought that the soldiers would go home after having killed so many people, and so the women were moving freely along the riverside doing their gathering. Before they knew it, the scouts came up on them. The women who had no children ran away, but my cousin couldn't run fast enough and was taken prisoner. Some of the Apaches hollered at the others to stop, but they only ran faster into the hills and got away. My cousin said that there was a large camp at the eastern end of the Superstition Mountains, and that she and the others had been planning to go there and then go to Fort Grant on the San Pedro River to give themselves up. These Indians used to roam the Superstition and Pinal Mountains, but they are part of our people, too. Now they had to be on the lookout for soldiers, whom the Apache scouts guided into places they could not enter before, leading them through the country to waterholes. The soldiers followed these scouts like they were blindfolded. The soldiers would never have seen an Indian camp if it hadn't been for the Apache Indian scouts, who went out and hunted for footprints. They knew every waterhole and every stream of running water. The next morning the command moved camp, following a big wash upstream toward the Superstition Mountains near the Gold Field. We camped at a little spring where our people got water. The next day we came to the Salt River again. The following morning I sensed that there had been some trouble, and one of the scouts told me that the woman who had a child on her back had left the camp. He asked me whether she had said anything about where she was going. I told him no. I told him I was sorry for her, for she was my cousin, and besides I thought that she would be there to comfort me, since I was lonely and the only one left of a large tribe of Indians. He said that she was gone and no one knew where to hunt her. The soldiers followed the Indian scouts as usual and camped at another spring. The next day the scouts came across some signs of Indians at the other end of the Superstition Mountains, so the soldiers marched that way and made camp on a little creek late in the evening. In a little while they moved again, and Captain Burns gave me something to carry—I suppose now it must have been bread, coffee, and sugar, things I did not know then. We went on a little way until we had to climb a big rough hill, and we got to the top at midnight all tired out. We found a mescal kiln built only a few days before. The mescal had been taken out, and there was waste scattered about. I ate all that I could find, and the soldiers seem to have liked it, too. Toward morning the Apache scouts came creeping up the hill to tell the soldiers where the Indian camp was. It was nearly daybreak, and the officers were told to get the men ready for action. Some companies were already descending the hill, the scouts in the lead, and the rest of the command following. Near sunup they encircled several tepees, but there was nobody inside. The inhabitants must have seen the soldiers approaching from a long way off and run away. We noticed that there were trails in the rough rocks that led into the Superstition Mountains, and the tracks looked as if they had been made two or three days earlier. There was no point in following the trail, and no way to return home except around the big mountain, where we came in sight of the pack train and horses that we had left behind. The next morning the soldiers and the rest of the command broke camp and climbed the hill again, going north this time. They entered the Pinal Mountains behind where Silver King is now. At that place the Pimas had massacred many Apaches, and we camped there. The next morning we went down to Sycamore Creek. The Apache scouts said that they had seen a camp about five miles from there, and the soldiers got ready to make a night march, taking plenty of rations and blankets. They had learned from experience to take those things, for they had suffered on long night marches before. They went a little way, then rested, then moved again and rested again, waiting for the scouts to return. It was getting near morning. The soldiers were moving around busily, making for a certain place. I peeped over a hill and noticed a couple of small fires burning. The Apache scouts were there, calling for the people in the camp not to run away lest the soldiers shoot them. There were about five or six young men who did not heed the warning. They started to run into the bushes, and three were shot down immediately. All the soldiers and scouts rushed into the camp, ordering the people there to lower their weapons. The Apache scouts told them to come out and surrender so that they could be saved. But a few men came out and shot at the soldiers, and two soldiers and a couple of Indian scouts fell. The surprised soldiers scattered into the little hills, and then they started pouring in volleys from all directions. After the sun came up the shooting ceased. The soldiers and scouts swamped the camp and found the wigwams riddled to pieces, and the inhabitants too. A few had hidden inside a deep hole made by water, and they came out and surrendered. Three were wounded, two so badly that they could not stand up and were left there to die. One of them was a fine-looking young man, shot through the bowels, his entrails hanging out.

3

The scouts scattered to see if they could find enemies or game. Some were to travel through the hills, then come in and make a report to the commanders. At this point, Lieutenant Schuyler and Al Sieber were in charge.
One evening two young men came in after they had looked the country over, and they brought with them some venison. They were taken to the commander and were disarmed and put under guard, for they had also brought in some cooked mescal, and this they got at an Indian camp, where they had warned the people to move in another direction, for some of the young men's near-relatives were in that camp. They had heard that their people had been massacred in a cave on the Salt River, and that soldiers were about and had enlisted lots of other Indians to find the remaining bands of Delshe's tribe.
Somehow Schuyler and Sieber, the chief of scouts, found out that the two young men had told the hostiles to make haste and keep out of the way of the soldiers. So they were kept under guard all the way to Fort Grant. One of the other scouts got mad, mad enough to shoot someone, and he went to the officers and told them that they were not treating the young men right, and if they cared to take all the scouts' weapons they should do so, and not just the weapons of those two simple-hearted young men. When he came back, he said that Schuyler and Sieber didn't say anything when he was talking to them so heatedly; he said they didn't pay any attention to him at all. But shortly thereafter some soldiers came to him and demanded his pistol, and he thought it best to quiet down and give them not only his pistol, but his rifle too. He was still mad, so he took the pistol from his belt and threw it, and then he took his gun and threw it a long way from the soldiers. The soldiers gathered them up and went off for the night. The next day the scout went off with the rest all the way to Fort Grant. The scouts didn't like the way he and the two young men had been treated. When they got to Fort Grant, they were all put in the guardhouse for two months.
The soldiers went off to be stationed in different places. Six companies were to be stationed at the San Carlos Agency until all the Apaches had settled down in the valley, and then the soldiers were to be sent away to other posts. Almost all the soldiers at Fort Grant left one morning, following Aravaipa Creek, and camped at an old ruin that looks as if, at one time, civilized people used to live there; there were many dugout houses, and the Indians might have chased them away and killed all the inhabitants. The next day the command camped at the upper end, at what is known as Hog Canyon. They had marched only about fifteen miles.
I heard afterward that a renegade Chiricahua Apache came into the camp and was told to give up his gun. He turned it to shoot the officers but was caught from behind, and his gun was
taken from him. The next morning the soldiers marched him down the canyon and hanged him on a tree, where they left him to die.
The whole command crossed the Gila River and camped at the San Carlos Agency. A few days afterward Captain Burns's and Captain Price's companies were ordered to move downriver about five miles. The commanders were ordered to be on the lookout for hostiles, since the soldiers were right in the midst of the thickest of all kinds of Apaches now. The chiefs were Eskiminzin, Captain Chicatto, and Eskinaspas. They were the chiefs of the Aravaipa, Pinal, and San Carlos Apaches, who are different from the White Mountain, Coyote, and Chiricahua Apaches.
The two companies went downriver, and it was two weeks before they came back up again. There were about six or seven hundred Indians there, and they spent their time gambling, in which they bet all kinds of things except money, since they didn't know the value of money, only things. They gambled for clothing, or a horse or a saddle. A lot of people gathered around to watch the gamblers play.
Once a fellow won everything another fellow had, and the loser wouldn't give up any of the things that the other had won from him. He went off home and came back with a gun in his hand. The others who were standing there began to laugh at him, and in his rage he shot right into the crowd, not caring who he hit. He shot, and two men dropped dead. One of the men had a son in the crowd, and he began to fire back at the man who had killed his father. The other man ran away when he saw that he had killed two men, but the young man followed him and shot him at last. The whole camp was involved in the affair, and soldiers were called in to quiet down the trouble. The Indians gave up the troublesome parties to the soldiers, and they were held under guard.
Years afterward, the killing still hadn't been forgotten, and then another killing occurred. An Indian man killed a chief, and then he was killed in turn by the Apache Kid, because the
chief was his uncle and stepfather. But it turns out that the chief was the son who killed the gambler all those years before, and the man who killed him was the gambler's son.
The Apache Kid became a renegade by taking up arms for his uncle. At the time he was the first sergeant of the Indian Company stationed there, charged with keeping order on the reservation. He thought that he was doing his duty as a US Scout by killing the man who had killed his uncle. He thought the agent and the chief of scouts might have given him credit for doing his job well. But the officers ordered that he and his followers be disarmed and locked up. He had been told to capture or kill anyone he saw shooting or killing another person.
Still, he was ordered to be disarmed and locked up without a fair trial. When he came in to the agency, Captain Pierce and Al Sieber told him and his men to go to the guardhouse. Sieber had already disarmed some of the men, but the Kid had not given up his gun. He made signs to the others to retrieve their gunbelts, which were piled up on a chair, and told them to get their guns while they were at it. Al Sieber must have heard him say this to his men, for he rushed to his tent to get his Winchester. Right behind him was Captain Pierce, who was the acting agent at the San Carlos Agency. He stepped through the door and jumped to one side just as a shot was fired. If he hadn't jumped, he would have taken the bullet straight through his shoulder, and it might have been fatal. I saw the shooting, for I was standing in a corner of Al Sieber's tent. When the shooting began I ran out as fast as I could and jumped into a gulch and went down to the slaughterhouse.
And so the Apache Kid became an outlaw. This was in the middle of June 1887.
The man he killed must have had it in his heart since childhood to get even someday. So he did, and he thought the matter settled forever, but instead he made the Apache Kid become as he was. In the end, public considerations will agree with the Apache Kid: from the start he did not unlawfully kill the man, and while the man was running away a whole group of scouts was shooting at him. But the Apache Kid got the whole blame, and afterward he was chased high and low, hiding from being seen, and those he might have killed tried to kill him first.

4
I must now go back to the time of the founding of the San Carlos Agency. There were no houses, only tents, and a large corral made of canvas, where rations were issued to the Indians. There were many different bands of Apaches there, and some were still slowly coming down to settle on the bottomland and had to draw rations. After Captain Burns and Captain Price settled the troubles, they went down to their camp, close to the river.
Often Indians came there who knew me. Some were related to me. They asked me to steal ammunition for them, but I told them I couldn't get it any more than they could, because the soldiers wouldn't trust me with any and would know that I would just give it away to the hostiles. I had no ammunition of my own to give them, and I told them that it was best just not to ask me. They replied that I should run away from the camp, and that they would take me so far away that the soldiers would never know where to look for me.
I was so bold as to answer that I had no near relatives living nearby, nobody I was anxious to see. But more Indians came around and insisted that I ought to leave, saying that a lonely cousin of mine had been crying because I was in the soldiers' camp. When I reached their camp, they said, then we would all move back toward the Superstition Mountains and Four Peaks, back to our old tramping grounds. I told them that they ought to know that I had no father, no mother, no aunt, no uncle, and that my little brother and my baby sister, whom I loved so much, had been killed; there were no living beings for me to be with after reaching the country where my people used to live.
A few weeks later the soldiers were ordered to move up to a camp headed by Eskiminzin and Captain Chicatto at Aravaipa Canyon. A few families of Pinal and Apache Mojaves were there.
The soldiers went to the mountains and found an Indian camp, and they made their own camp within half a mile of it. They stayed there nearly two months. Again, every day, Indians came and talked with me, and they urged me to leave the soldiers. Some said that the soldiers were going to sell me off to the Pimas, and some said that the soldiers were going to kill me.
Clearly it was time for me to join them. So one night I left the camp. I always slept with Captain Burns, who made me lie next to the wall of the tent so that he would be in front of me. But no one noticed that I loosened the tent pegs right behind where I lay. About midnight the whole camp was quiet, and Captain Burns was sound asleep. I had gotten a blanket to use as a pillow, and I stuck it through one of the tent corners and then quietly moved under it. I stepped out into the darkness and ran off to the nearest Apache camp, listening at the door to see what people they were. I passed several camps until I came to one where I could clearly understand every word that was spoken by the people inside, but I also knew that these were not the people I was looking for. The man I was looking for was named Matawaha, Wind, who was my cousin. He lived with us until my mother was killed; then he went off and got married and lived among the Indians in the Pinal Mountains. He was the one who begged me to leave the soldiers' camp to come to his place, and the next day, he said, he would take me away up to the top of a mountain to hide until nightfall.
At last I came to Wind's tepee. It wasn't much of a tepee, because it was just hastily thrown together. My cousin took me to the chief, who was another cousin of mine, but the chief was afraid of the other Apaches, who were more numerous than the Pinal Apaches. So, he said, if the other Apaches gave him away for hiding a captive from the soldiers, then the chief would be liable to be put to death. He thought it best for me to go back to the soldiers' camp and stay with them for as long as I could, for there was no use coming back to the Indians again, since I had no close relations left.
Everyone cried while the chief talked, but they agreed with him. I cried, too, and went away. I made up my mind not to listen to any foolish advice ever again. When I reached Captain
Burns's tent, I listened carefully and heard him snoring loudly. I crept in the same way I had left, and I quietly lay there.
The next morning I was scared of being whipped for staying out all night, but by good luck no one knew that I was ever gone. The soldiers returned to the main camp, where spring was
beginning and the grass and cottonwood trees were green, and there were wildflowers everywhere.

The commander of F Company, Captain Price, was ordered to join the other commands near the agency. This must have been in 1873. G Company under Captain Burns, along with some into Apache scouts who came to join them, went off one day to the northwest. Their first camp was at a spring called Coyote Hole. The next camp was below what is now the mining city of obe. And the next camp was on the beginning of the Salt River, near the present site of the great Roosevelt Lake. We followed the lake down to Tonto Creek, and in its valley we saw a herd of wild horses. The Apache scouts shot at them, but I never learned whether they killed any or not.
I do not know how many days we traveled, passing the country where Payson and Strawberry are now. I remember, though, that a packer named Black Jack Long once shot about ten
wild turkeys for the command.
Finally we came to Camp Verde and the Verde Valley. At this post there were just a few soldiers, for most of the command was out scouting. Captain Burns stayed only two days, then marched off to the west, passed through Cherry Creek, and came to a stone corral where US Mail riders stayed overnight. The next day we moved over the rolling fine grazing country that is now called Lonesome Valley. On the way the soldiers stopped to shoot at antelope, and the horse I was riding took fright and bolted. I held on tight, but the horse fell on its back, pinning me underneath. Only my leg was hurt.
That afternoon, the company, under Captain James Burns and Lieutenant E. D. Thomas, arrived at Fort Whipple. They remained there for several days. One day the soldiers were paid off. While we were at the San Carlos Agency they made me a soldier suit to wear, and I was dressed as tidy as any soldier and had learned the soldiers' ways, so that I saluted whenever I met an officer. When all the soldiers got their pay, the company bugler took me to a room where several officers were sitting. I walked into the room, head up, and stood so straight, hands on each side of my body, and so still that the officers began to laugh. I stood there and did not move, and they handed me some money. I did not know then how much money it was, but a couple of years later one of the soldiers told me that it was $1.45. I don't know what I did with the money, since I didn't know its value in those days. I know it now, and I wish I had been around at the place called Battle Flat, between Crown King and Prescott, when some Apache Indians captured some money. They cut the paper money up to make cigarette paper, and they threw away all the coins because thev were so heavy and they were traveline on foot 
Well, after the soldiers got their money, they marched away, climbing the big pine mountain that stands off to the west of Prescott and down to Skull Valley. They camped there. That

evening Captain Burns handed me a piece of white paper, and also some green paper, and pointed me toward a house a little way off from the camp. I ran off to the house and gave the papers

to a man I saw there. He went off in quick order and came back with some eggs. I went running off to camp with them. I noticed that both officers were laughing, but after a while Captain

Burns began talking and reached for a stick. All at once he came at me and hit me on my back, swearing and hitting me as I danced around, crying. But after a while the man to whom I had

given the money came running up to Captain Burns and handed him something, and they began talking and laughing, too. Then Captain Burns threw away the stick. He must have given me

a five-or ten-dollar bill and expected me to wait for the change. But he should have known better than that, because I was not civilized enough to know the value of different kinds of money,

nor would I have known how much an egg is worth, whether a dollar or five dollars or five cents. I did not know how to buy anything in those days, nor would I have known how to ask

to buy something. It seems to me that it was foolish on Captain Burns's part to punish me for doing what I did. I was willing to do anything he asked, as much as I was able to understand him.

He might have been right, though, since he was starting to teach me how to be mindful about doing business with people.

5
